actions|Preemptable (interruptable) services. If you have a service that takes a long time (moving a robot arm), you can use actions to make them interruptable.
bags|A bag is a file that contains recorded topic data. rosbag is the package that defines command line tools and APIs for interacting with bags.
callback|A callback is a function that gets "connected" to a particular event. The most common usage would be a function inside of a node that gets called every time a message gets published on a particular topic.
catkin|This is the primary build system of ROS. catkin is used to convert message definitions into useful code, C++ code into executables, define installation instructions for packages, and other things. More about these ideas can be read on the catkin conceptual overview page.
catkin_create_pkg|Automatically create a new directory with a template CMakeLists.txt and package.xml – the two files required by all ROS packages. Allows you to list dependencies and have them automatically be filled out in the package.xml.
catkin_init_workspace|Creates a symlink from your workspace src directory to a CMake file located in your current ROS install. This is a required step for catkin to function properly.
catkin_lint|This is a relatively new package designed for finding issues with catkin package.xml and CMakeLists.txt files.
catkin_make|Builds targets contained in a workspace. Must be executed from the root of the workspace.
catkinize|This command calls several scripts that are designed to help the transition from rosbuild to catkin.
client libraries|these are the "glue" that tie ROS concepts together with code that you write. For example, rospy is the client library that allows a user to write Python code that interacts with the ROS world via publishing, subscribing, parameters, etc. There are several different client libraries, but the most commonly used are roscpp and rospy; rosjava and roslisp are both used occasionally.
CMakeLists.txt|This file tells catkin how and what to build in a particular package.
environment variables|ROS uses a variety of environment variables to define where packages are located, which ROS version you are using, where to look for the ROS master, to identify your machine, and more. These are typically set via setup.bash files in your workspace.
latching|When a publisher is created, if it is set to latch, then every time a new subscriber to that publisher's topic is created, it will automatically receive a copy of the last message that was published on that topic. This can be useful for topics that are only published occasionally (like map data or status indicators).
launching|A launch file along with the command line tool roslaunch allow you to do many ROS operations with a single command. You can set parameters, run nodes, include other launch files, parse command line arguments, and more.
logging|ROS has a special mechanism for storing, sorting, filtering, etc. messages that are printed to the terminal from running nodes. This is done via the rosout topic and with ROS logging instead of standard print statements. Log files can be sorted and searched in real-time via rqt_console, and they can be parsed/searched manually by looking in the '~/.ros/log/' directory.
manifest|A manifest is an XML file that must be included in the root directory of any ROS package. The file declares the package name, dependencies, version number, author, and more. In rosbuild, the old ROS build system, this file was named manifest.xml; In catkin, the new build system, the file is named package.xml.
master|The master is a ROS process that helps nodes locate each other and establish communication channels based on their publisher/ subscriber relationships and any services. The master also manages the parameter server. The master is typically started through the roscore command-line tool, or it is automatically started via a roslaunch call.
MD5|Messages are serialized to facilitate communicating their data structures between nodes that may be in different languages. For this to work, both nodes must know how and what data was serialized. ROS uses an MD5 hash calculation for verifying this information. This is one of the primary issues in interoperability between different versions of ROS i.e. different versions may have different message definitions, resulting in different MD5 hashes.
message|A .msg file defines the contents of a ROS message using a simple text description format. A message is a data structure that is communicated over a ROS topic. During a catkin_make invocation, these .msg files are used to generate language-specific implementations of these data structures for use in the client libraries e.g. a simple message definition automatically gets converted into both a Python class that can be used with import, and a C++ header that can be used with #include.
metapackage|A metapackage is a way of building a collection of ROS packages. The metapackage does not install files, contain any code, or any other common package files. Rather, it simply lists dependencies on a group of other packages. If one installs the metapackage, they typically automatically install all its dependencies (usually via apt-get). A metapackage is the catkin replacement for the rosbuild concept of a stack. Often metapackages are still referred to as stacks e.g. "the navigation stack".
names|All elements in the ROS computation graph (nodes, services, topics, parameters, etc.) must have a valid graph resource name. The master uses these names when forming connections, and they are an important part of how simple systems can scale up to complex systems through encapsulation.
node|A node is simply a process that, when run, performs some sort of computation in the ROS world. Nodes communicate with each other via topics, services, and parameters.
package|ROS software is organized into packages. A package may include nodes, configuration files, non-ROS libraries, launch files, and more. All packages must have a package.xml file defining its manifest.
parameters|Parameters are globally accessible variables (all nodes can see them). Typically these contain things like configuration or calibration data. They are set and retrieved via the parameter server run by the master.
publisher|Nodes use publishers to send data, or "publish" data, on a particular topic.
remapping|Many ROS names such as topics, services, and parameters can be "remapped" at the command line. This allows multiple nodes of the same type to be started with different configurations. It also facilitates re-use of general nodes in specific cases.
rosbag|This is a command line tool for creating, analyzing, playing, etc., bag files
rosbuild|Up until the Fuerte version of ROS this package provided a set of CMake macros for compiling ROS packages. This has largely been replaced by catkin.
roscd|Change directory to the location of a package/metapackage using just the package name.
rosclean|Used for checking disk usage and clearing out ROS log files.
roscore|This is used for starting the master
roscp|Copy files from ROS packages
rosdep|Used for installing system dependencies for ROS packages. Can be used across many different linux/unix distributions
rosed|Used to automatically open ROS files in a text editor
rosinstall|This command/package is used for updating and installing source-code-based packages. It is an important tool for building ROS from source. Often large collections of associated packages can be cloned from source repositories automatically using rosinstall e.g. all of Baxter's required source code is added to a workspace by cloning a rosinstall file, and then using the rosinstall command line utility to clone all of the required Git repositories into your workspace.
rosinstall_generator|Used for creating rosinstall files
roslaunch|When called with a .launch file, this tool can start many nodes at once, set parameters, automatically respawn crashed nodes, and automatically start master.
rosls|View contents of a package/metapackage or location
rosmaster|This is an executable that actually implements the master by importing and executing a Python module called rosmaster. You should never need to interact with this command, users use roscore to start the master.
rosmsg|Tool for displaying information about messages including message definitions, packages using a message, messages defined in a package, and more.
rosnode|This is used to control and display information about running nodes. It can list nodes, kill nodes, display topic and parameter information for a particular node, and more.
rospack|Displays information about packages, and it is used by catkin for determining information about packages.
rosparam|Tool for listing, getting, and setting parameters
rosrun|This the command for starting nodes.
rosservice|This can be used for listing and calling services
rossrv|This is basically the same as rosmsg, but for services
rostopic|Display debug information about ROS topics including publishers, subscribers, frequency, raw values, etc.
roswtf|A tool for diagnosing common issues with a ROS system.
rqt|rqt is a Qt-based framework for GUI development in ROS. The rqt_common_plugins metapackage provides many pre-made ROS GUIs that are great for working with ROS. Built in tools include bagfile plotting, playing, and recording, visualization of the /tf tree, image stream viewers, and more.
rviz|rviz is the primary 3D visualization tool used in ROS.
service|A service defines a request-reply communication paradigm between nodes. There are special .srv service definition files which are essentially just pairs of messages; one for the request and one for the reply.
stack|A stack is simply a collection of packages. This is a rosbuild-only concept that was replaced by a metapackage.
subscriber|Nodes use subscribers to listen to data being published on topics.
tf|This is a special package and topic for tracking transformations between coordinate frames. Many robotic systems rely heavily on geometric calculations and tf is the primary way to do these calculations within ROS.
time|ROS has built-in primitives for defining the current ROS time. Often messages are timestamped, and this can be an important way of "synchronizing" portions of your system.
timer|Timers are used to get callbacks to run at a specified frequency. This is useful for polling things like keyboard input, publishing "heartbeat" messages, and many other things.
topic|A topic is a named channel over which nodes communicate messages. Topics facilitate a one-to-many or many-to-many communication paradigm i.e. one subscriber publishing a message on a topic can have many subscribers listening to that topic. There can also be multiple publishers all publishing on the same topic; all subscribers would receive all copies of published topics regardless of which publisher the message originated from.
URDF|Stands for "Universal Robot Description Format". This is an XML schema that defines a standard for describing robot models, sensors, environments, etc.
workspace|A workspace is simply a directory where you develop, compile, and install catkin packages. Typically a user will work out of a single workspace, but workspaces do allow chaining/overlaying so that you can combine several different workspaces in varying ways to create different "effective-workspace" configurations.
xacro|Most real-world URDFs are built using xacro. xacro is a simple XML macro language. With xacro, you can write simple, easy to read XML-like files that include things like variables, basic math, and looping constructs. This simple file then gets expanded into a valid XML file once it has been processed by xacro.
YAML|YAML is a simple "markup language" for defining dictionary-like data i.e. keys pointing to values. ROS uses YAML files for defining many parameters at once, and the command line options for rostopic are based off of YAML syntax.